Hello, everyone. My name is Thomas. Thank you all for joining me both here live and if you're there online
And welcome to my talk. There's a new plumber in town now the
Observant among the audience will quickly figure out that this is about the plumber package at least if you know about the plumber package
Plumber has been with us for a while now
It's it's a pretty old package. You may not know it, but the first commit was back in June 10th in
2015 and
The statisticians between you will quickly figure out that this means that plumber has a 10 year old anniversary
this year, so
if you if you read the
Title of the slide you might get the sense that this talk will not end well for plumber
um
But I think we should just like take a brief moment and and recognize
What a tremendous success plumber has been both as a package, but also at large for their community
I mean it has allowed data scientists with no or very limited knowledge about web technologies
To take their R code and share it with the world or share with their organization. I mean that is tremendous
But it's an old package and
I have some experience with old packages. I also maintain a package called ggplot2 which is 18 years old today, so
I have I know something about old code and one of the kind of you can call it a
Law of thermodynamics of coding is that old code accrue technical depth. There's no way around it
So what do you do once your code evolves into something that becomes hard to maintain?
There's different ways to do it deal with this one of them is to kind of just accept the situation
There's nothing wrong with that. I mean you can just say well this code is horrible to maintain
But on the other hand there's not a lot to do in it, so whenever I need to like delve into it
I just have to accept that I have to fight with this code base
This is this is an absolutely
Acceptable approach to it because on the other hand the code base is trusted and true
It has a lot of mileage under its belt, so there's nothing wrong with keeping it around you just have to kind of
Reconcile yourself that it will not be a pleasant experience to to continue coding with it
There's another way around it. You can try to kind of surgically replace some of the the code that that is
responsible for the technical depth
This is kind of what we do in ggplot2
I think every every time we release ggplot2 we have taken out some of the old code and placed it with something new
and this is this is perilous in terms of
Maintaining a package in the sense that it's very hard to convince yourself that when you replace something internally
That it just continues to work as before outside of the world
So it's certainly not something that that you can do all the time
But on the other hand you you have something that continues to evolve and grow without like you can keep
The technical depth pretty low
Now there's a third option which is to kind of say
Goodbye code leave it behind start on a new adventure
And
For plumber I have decided the last thing so I'm excited to share with you that plumber 2 is a new package that we have
Created which will
Replace plumber in some sense and the rest of the talk
Will basically be about me convincing you that that's a fantastic thing
So what is plumber 2 well it's a it's a complete rewrite of plumber
There is basically no overlap in the code base between the two
Now just because it's a complete rewrite doesn't mean that it is complete new in the sense
It is built on a lot of battle tested technology
So it is built on top of things that have almost been around as long as plumber
But the code inside the plumber 2 packages is all brand new
Now don't worry if you're used to using plumber
It doesn't mean that you have to go out and learn a completely new concept
It will feel very familiar if you're already using plumber if you have never heard of plumber or have never used plumber
I can just say that it's a it's a framework that is very easy to get into and plumber 2 kind of adapts that idea
That being said it contains some breaking changes
So you cannot just take your plumber applications and just like blindly port them over to plumber 2
But it will be very easy
And you can you can kind of take all of the knowledge that you have from plumber and apply a lot of it to plumber 2
On the flip side then it is filled with amazing new features
And I'll show some of them today
But just to start a bit with the familiarity part
So if you are used to looking at plumber code you will recognize this I hope
So if you don't know anything about plumber it's a way of creating web servers by annotating R functions
So it feels very much as writing an R function
And if you're used to writing R functions and documentation you're used to writing Roxygen code
And plumber 2 annotation feels very much like Roxygen code
So this is this is something that you could put on top of your function
And it will turn if you put it through plumber it will turn your function into like an end point for a web server
And if you're used to this if you're used to doing this with plumber
I hope that you can see that this feels very very similar
Nothing dangerous here maybe some new things
But some of it is completely the same so for instance this line
Which defines that the function below this annotation will respond to people going to a URL
Which is forecast slash some city
In the example up here the city is Copenhagen that's where I'm from
This is exactly the same as you would have in plumber so some of it is completely the same
Now there are other things that are different we're in 2025 now
So you can actually have multi-line comments in plumber 2 which is like crazy
But why can we do this well it's because it doesn't just look like Roxygen 2
It's actually powered by Roxygen 2 now
Plumber had its own like engine for understanding this annotation
But we don't need to reinvent the wheel
So plumber 2 is now using Roxygen 2 to pass these things
So if you're familiar with Roxygen 2 then everything that you write there will be understandable by plumber
It also has some new tags
So if you have your function you need to put some inputs into it
One of them is the city that we talked about up here in the URL
But there are other ways to put input into your end point
And one of them is the query string of the URL
Which is everything that follows this question mark
And in plumber everything was kind of documented under the parent thing
But they come different places from
And that means that you could kind of mask your input in various ways
Well no more because we now have a dedicated place for documenting
And taking in query parameters
We also have a dedicated way for things coming from the body of the request
So new things but not new concepts I would say
The last thing I just want to point out there is of course more to it
Is that we have much richer way of documenting both the import type
And the output type of the function
So here we say that this output of this function when it responds to a request
It responds with a 200 which means in HTTP language it means everything is okay
Here's what you ask for
And we also document that what is returning will be an array of objects
And those objects will have an element called day which is a date
An element called temperature or temp which is a number
And an element called rain which is a boolean
And this is just the tip of the iceberg
So we have really built out the whole documentation of input and output types in Plumber 2
So you can do even more
So that's a bit about familiarity
I hope I have convinced you that it doesn't look completely foreign
But there are some new things in there
So what about the features?
Well this is the exciting part of everything, right?
And this is where I kind of convince you that this is a good thing
The first thing I want to talk about is asynchronicity
Now asynchronicity for a web server is potentially important, potentially irrelevant
But if you have a function that takes just a bit of time to compute
You will end up blocking all the other requests that comes in while this is computing
Because R is single-threaded
This is not a problem if you only have one user
But if you have like maybe 100 users that are constantly pinging to you or even more
Then it can be a problem because everyone else has to wait for you to finish the computations
This is where asynchronicity comes in
You can send off the computations to another server
And then pick it up once it's done and then send it back to the user while you're handling all the stuff
It's not that Plumber couldn't do this
If you returned a promise in a Plumber endpoint
Then it could actually do the same thing
But we have built this out in Plumber 2
So that we can automatically convert your endpoints into asynchronous functions
They are built on Mirai which is one of the newest and best packages
For doing asynchronous computations in R
But it is extensible as well
So if you have your pet asynchronous package that you want to use instead
You can actually just create a new plugin for Plumber 2
To use that for asynchronous computations
And as well it allows you to chain computations
So usually when you have some sort of asynchronous computation
You want to pick it up and you might want to do something on the mainframe in the end
And you can do this with Plumber 2 with easy tagging
And I'm going to show you how
So how do you turn something into an asynchronous function?
Well use the async tag and this is all it takes
So if you pass this into Plumber 2
Then Plumber 2 will take care of converting this function into an asynchronous execution
And take care of all of it for you basically
Now if you want to do something after this computation has done
You can use the then tag following this tag
And then do whatever you want to do on the mainframe before
Or main thread before returning results to the request
So that's async
Another shiny new feature in Plumber 2 is that it supports running shiny
So that should be like a meme around
I put shiny in your Plumber 2
You don't have to shiny on your shiny or something like that
Basically what it means is that you can now launch
And serve one or more shiny app as part of your Plumber 2 application
Each app will run in a separate process
Plumber 2 will take care of launching them
And take care of tearing them down once Plumber 2 stops
This is actually a subset of a more general functionality
That is in Plumber 2 which is something called a reverse proxy
And what this basically means is that
Well you might have something that is not shiny that you want to serve through Plumber 2
Well you can do that because a reverse proxy is simply a communication layer
Between your front end and something else on the back end
But shiny is kind of a first level citizen
Because we can launch them and tear them down as we want to do
How does this look? Well, surprisingly simple
There's a shiny sack and you can point it to where you want to serve it from
Here we have two different shiny apps that we serve from two different paths
One is app slash app one and the other is slash app two
So pretty simple to get going
Now you don't have to serve them from a particular sub-path of your application
You can also just serve it from the root
Now you may think why would i even want to do that?
That's just the same as launching a shiny app
But you might want to do this because there's also another tag that says accept
So you can serve shiny from the root
But then have the rest of your api application being served from a sub-path of your url
So when people visit the root of your page
They're served with a shiny app
But they can still interact with it with an api from a sub-path
So how would you do that?
Well, you'll just have a second file that you mount on a different sub-root
And there you'll have all the api logic that you're used to have from a plumber
There's also support for quarto
So if you want to serve quarto from plumber, that's now possible
If you have parameterized reports in quarto or rmarkdown
These can be accessed by using the query parameters in the url
Those will be funneled into the parameters in your report
You can also have support for multiple outputs
So if you have a report and you want to serve both a pdf and an html version of it
You can just add those extensions to the path that you're querying from
Or you can use a content type header to do that
And it has built-in caching
So it's not going to rebuild the report every time that the user is asking for it
How does that look?
Well, kind of like how shiny was looking
So we just have a new tag called report
And we're just directing it to the path where we want to serve the report from
And then underneath it all, where we'd usually have an endpoint logic
We'll just point to the path of the file that we want to serve
And Plumber 2 takes care of all that for you
Last feature that I'm going to talk about is security
Now, security is quite important when it comes to web technologies
It's important if you're just serving Plumber inside your own organization
It is even more important if you're trying to communicate with the rest of the world
And I would say that Plumber can do better in that regard
And that is why Plumber 2 is doing better in that regard
So Plumber 2 is coming with a bunch of plugins that you can add to your
Easily add to your web server
One of them is just a matter of setting best practice headers
This is not like rocket science
But a lot of people do not know about what all of the headers in a response should be
To confine with best practices
And we now take their hands and give them good defaults
There's also, I think this is one of the most requested things in the Plumber github page
Is something like how do I use course
And if you don't know about course, I will show you in a minute
And there's also something called resource isolation policies
Which is another thing that we now support
So going back to this example that I had with familiarity
This is just the same code
Consider that we have this weather forecasting service
And we are running that from an api and serving it out to the world
And then I have another web page
I want to use this
So I have a web page and some javascript
And that javascript is then querying my other api
Now this will not work out of the box
Because the web has evolved to try to be more secure
So that web pages cannot just from javascript ask other web pages for stuff
This is something called cross origin resource sharing
This is something that you have to turn on
And say, well, I want the rest of the world to be able to kind of call what I provide
Now how do I turn this on in Plumber 2?
Well, surprisingly enough, it's pretty simple
So we have the course tag
And we just say, well, I have this web page
My trusted friend
I really want to interact with this other api I have
And we now turn it on and everything works perfectly
And then there's the rest
Because there are a lot of features in this
I don't have time to talk about all of it
So this is just a little taster
I hope I've gotten you a bit excited about what it can do
So that was a bit about the features
What about the future?
Well, I am happy to announce that Plumber 2 is available on Crayon today
Or I would have been happy to announce that if that was the fact
The truth is that Plumber 2 is in the hands of Crayon today
So that means that it is probably available on Crayon within a week or so
It is very hard to time these things
Please use it if you have anything to use it for
If you don't have anything to use it for, then just, like, toy with it
Have fun with it
Please report any issues
Please report anything that you feel is missing
Any good ideas
I'll be happy to add them to it
Because the code is now much easier to add stuff to
But also please be mindful of the novelty
I'm just saying this
If I got you excited, please don't run home
And then, like, rewrite all the business logic of your operation in Plumber 2
And then see it crash horribly
It's not that I don't trust my code
But it's not been battle-tested yet, right?
So start out small and then grow it into your organization
What about Plumber?
Well, don't worry
It will stay on Crayon
It is now superseded by Plumber 2
So it will not receive any new features
If you have any requests for features, we will say, well, have a go at Plumber 2 instead
But it will stay there
And that means that your current APIs will continue to work as before
So you are in no rush to update your packages
You can just continue before
And then, of course, gradually, I would advise you to move over to Plumber 2
But in your own pace
You can read much more about Plumber 2 at this URL
And otherwise, I would just say, thank you so much for your attention
I hope you will have fun writing APIs
Testing
Okay
For now, just for these questions back and forth to you
So, just a few questions
I think we have time for, like, one or two
Are there any situations where you would suggest that someone start a new project and still use the link?
No, it's a short answer
I think we can use this
So, one more question here
Will it work with Vetiver? And if so, when?
Maybe
No, this is not something I have dived into yet
This is certainly something that we will look into
It should work with Connect now
It should, of course, integrate well with all our other projects
But it is still early days
So, I would not try to use Vetiver with it yet
But it will come, of course
I think we can get one quick one in
So, why Plumber 2?
I think you touched on this a little bit in your talk
But why Plumber 2 and not overwrite Plumber with the new code
And require legacy users to install a legacy version of the package?
So, some of it comes back to
Like this slide
It will stay on CRAN
You don't have to do anything with the thing that you put in production
I think it's nicer of me to not break anything
And require users to do something for their business logic
So, I'd rather start afresh
And allow users to just continue as before
But be excited enough to kind of change what they're doing gradually
So, I think that is the main thing, really
And people should be able to live with having a 2 after it
It worked well enough with ggplot2
So, we'll be good
Thank you so much